<!---
Copyright Â© 2015-2018 the contributors (see Contributors.md).

This file is part of Knora.

Knora is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU Affero General Public License as published
by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

Knora is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU Affero General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Affero General Public
License along with Knora.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
-->

# The Knora Base Ontology

@@toc { depth=2 }

## Overview

The Knora base ontology is the main built-in Knora ontology. Each
project that uses Knora must describe its data model by creating
ontologies that extend this ontology.

The Knora base ontology is identified by the IRI
`http://www.knora.org/ontology/knora-base`. In the Knora documentation
in general, it is identified by the prefix `knora-base`, but for
brevity, in this document, we use `kb` or omit the prefix entirely.

## The Knora Data Model

The Knora data model is based on the observation that, in the
humanities, a value or literal is often itself structured and can be
highly complex. Moreover, a value may have its own metadata, such as its
creation date, information about permissions, and so on. Therefore, the
Knora base ontology describes structured value types that can store this
type of metadata. In the diagram below, a book (`ex:book2`) has a title
(identified by the predicate `ex:title`) and a publication date
(`ex:pubdate`), each of which has some metadata.

![Figure 1](knora-base-fig1.dot.png "Figure 1")

### Projects

In Knora, each item of data belongs to some particular project. Each
project using Knora must define a `kb:knoraProject`, which has these
properties (cardinalities are indicated in parentheses after each
property name):

`projectShortname` (1)

:   A short name that can be used to identify the project in
    configuration files and the like.

`projectLongname` (1)

:   The full name of the project.

`projectShortcode` (1)

:   A hexadecimal code that uniquely identifies the project. These
    codes are assigned to projects by the [DaSCH](http://dasch.swiss/).

`projectDescription` (1-n)

:   A description of the project.

`belongsToInstitution` (0-1)

:   The `kb:Institution` that the project belongs to.

Ontologies, resources, and valuesare associated with a project by means of the
`kb:attachedToProject` property, as described in @ref:[Ontologies](#ontologies)
and @ref:[Properties of Resource](#properties-of-resource)). Users are associated with a project by
means of the `kb:isInProject` property, as described in
@ref:[Users and Groups](#users-and-groups).

### Ontologies

Each project-specific ontology must be defined as an `owl:Ontology` with the
properties `rdfs:label` and `kb:attachedToProject`.

### Resources

All the content produced by a project (e.g. digitised primary source
materials or research data) must be stored in objects that belong to
subclasses of `kb:Resource`, so that Knora can query and
update that content. Each project using the Knora base ontology must
define its own OWL classes, derived from `kb:Resource`, to represent the
types of data it deals with. A subclass of `kb:Resource` may
additionally be a subclass of any other class, e.g. an industry-standard
class such as `foaf:Person`; this can facilitate searches across
projects.

Resources have properties that point to different parts of the content
they contain. For example, a resource representing a book could have a
property called `hasAuthor`, pointing to the author of the book. There
are two possible kinds of content in a Knora resource: Knora values (see
@ref:[Values](#values)) or links to other resources (see
@ref:[Links Between Resources](#links-between-resources)). Properties that point to Knora values
must be subproperties of `kb:hasValue`, and properties that point to
other resources must be subproperties of `kb:hasLinkTo`. Either of these
two types of properties may also be a subproperty of any other property,
e.g. an industry-standard property such as `foaf:name`; this can
facilitate searches across projects. Each property definition must
specify the types that its subjects and objects must belong to (see
@ref:[Constraints on the Types of Property Subjects and Objects](#constraints-on-the-types-of-property-subjects-and-objects) for details).

Each project-specific resource class definition must use OWL cardinality
restrictions to specify the properties that resources of that class can
have (see @ref:[OWL Cardinalities](#owl-cardinalities) for details).

Resources are not versioned; only their values are versioned (see
@ref:[Values](#values)).

Every resource is required to have an `rdfs:label`. The object of this
property is an `xsd:string`, rather than a Knora value; hence it is not
versioned. A user who has modify permission on a resource (see
@ref:[Authorisation](#authorisation)) can change its label.

A resource can be marked as deleted; Knora does this by
adding the predicate `kb:isDeleted true` to the resource. An optional
`kb:deleteComment` may be added to explain why the resource has been
marked as deleted. Deleted resources are normally hidden. They cannot be
undeleted, because even though resources are not versioned, it is
necessary to be able to find out when a resource was deleted. If
desired, a new resource can be created by copying data from a deleted
resource.

#### Properties of Resource

`creationDate` (1)

:   The time when the resource was created.

`attachedToUser` (1)

:   The user who owns the resource.

`attachedToProject` (1)

:   The project that the resource is part of.

`lastModificationDate` (0-1)

:   A timestamp indicating when the resource (or one of its values) was
    last modified.

`seqnum` (0-1)

:   The sequence number of the resource, if it is part of an ordered
    group of resources, such as the pages in a book.

`isDeleted` (1)

:   Indicates whether the resource has been deleted.

`deleteDate` (0-1)

:   If the resource has been deleted, indicates when it was deleted.

`deleteComment` (0-1)

:   If the resource has been deleted, indicates why it was deleted.

Resources can have properties that point to other resources; see
@ref:[Links Between Resources](#links-between-resources). A resource grants permissions to groups
of users; see @ref:[Authorisation](#authorisation).

#### Representations

It is not practical to store all data in RDF. In particular, RDF is not
a good storage medium for binary data such as images. Therefore, Knora
stores such data outside the triplestore, in ordinary files. A resource
can have one or more files attached to it. For each file, there is a
`kb:FileValue` in the triplestore containing metadata about the file
(see @ref:[FileValue](#filevalue). A resource that has file
values must belong to one of the subclasses of `kb:Representation`. The
base class `Representation`, which is not intended to be used directly,
has this property:

`hasFileValue` (1-n)

:   Points to one or more file values.

Its subclasses, which are intended to be used directly in data, include:

`StillImageRepresentation`

:   A representation containing still image files.

`MovingImageRepresentation`

:   A representation containing video files.

`AudioRepresentation`

:   A representation containing audio files.

`DDDrepresentation`

:   A representation containing 3D images.

`TextRepresentation`

:   A representation containing formatted text files, such as XML files.

`DocumentRepresentation`

:   A representation containing documents (such as PDF files) that are
    not text files.

There are two ways for a project to design classes for representations.
The simpler way is to create a resource class that represents a thing in
the world (such as `ex:Painting`) and also belongs to a subclass of
`Representation`. This is adequate if the class can have only one type
of file attached to it. For example, if paintings are represented only
by still images, `ex:Painting` could be a subclass of
`StillImageRepresentation`. This is the only approach supported in
version 1 of the Knora API.

The more flexible approach, which is allowed by the Knora base ontology
and will be supported by version 2 of the Knora API, is for each
`ex:Painting` to use the `kb:hasRepresentation` property to point to
other resources containing files that represent the painting. Each of
these other resources can extend a different subclass of
`Representation`. For example, a painting could have a
`StillImageRepresentation` as well as a `DDDrepresentation`.

#### Standard Resource Classes

In general, each project using Knora must define its own subclasses of
`kb:Resource`. However, the Knora base ontology provides some standard
subclasses of `kb:Resource`, which are intended to be used by any
project:

`Region`

:   Represents a region of a `Representation` (see
    @ref:[Representations](#representations)).

`Annotation`

:   Represents an annotation of a resource. The `hasComment` property
    points to the text of the annotation, represented as a
    `kb:TextValue`.

`LinkObj`

:   Represents a link that connects two or more resources. A `LinkObj`
    has a `hasLinkTo` property pointing to each resource that it
    connects, as well as a `hasLinkToValue` property pointing to a
    reification of each of these direct links (see
    @ref:[Links Between Resources](#links-between-resources)). A `LinkObj` is more complex (and
    hence less convenient and readable) than a simple direct link, but
    it has the advantage that it can be annotated using an `Annotation`.
    For improved readability, a project can make its own subclasses of
    `LinkObj` with specific meanings.

### Values

The Knora base ontology defines a set of OWL classes that are derived
from `kb:Value` and represent different types of structured values found
in humanities data. This set of classes may not be extended by
project-specific ontologies.

A value is always part of one particular resource, which points to it
using some property derived from `hasValue`. For example, a
project-specific ontology could specify a `Book` class with a property
`hasSummary` (derived from `hasValue`), and that property could have a
`knora-base:objectClassConstraint` of `TextValue`. This would mean that
the summary of each book is represented as a `TextValue`.

Knora values are versioned. Existing values are not modified. Instead, a
new version of an existing value is created. The new version is linked
to the old version via the `previousValue` property.

"Deleting" a value means marking it with `kb:isDeleted`. An optional
`kb:deleteComment` may be added to explain why the value has been marked
as deleted. Deleted values are normally hidden.

Most types of values are marked as deleted without creating a new
version of the value. However, link values must be treated as a special
case. Before a `LinkValue` can be marked as deleted, its reference count
must be decremented to 0. Therefore, a new version of the `LinkValue` is
made, with a reference count of 0, and it is this new version that is
marked as deleted.

To simplify the enforcement of ontology constraints, and for consistency
with resource updates, no new versions of a deleted value can be made;
it is not possible to undelete. Instead, if desired, a new value can be
created by copying data from a deleted value.

#### Properties of Value

`valueCreationDate` (1)

:   The date and time when the value was created.

`attachedToUser` (1)

:   The user who owns the value.

`attachedToProject` (0-1)

:   The project that the value is part of. If not specified, defaults to
    the project of the containing resource.

`valueHasString` (1)

:   A human-readable string representation of the value's contents,
    which is available to Knora's full-text search index.

`valueHasOrder` (0-1)

:   A resource may have several properties of the same type with
    different values (which will be of the same class), and it may be
    necessary to indicate an order in which these values occur. For
    example, a book may have several authors which should appear in a
    defined order. Hence, `valueHasOrder`, when present, points to an
    integer literal indicating the order of a given value relative to
    the other values of the same property. These integers will not
    necessarily start at any particular number, and will not necessarily
    be consecutive.

`previousValue` (0-1)

:   The previous version of the value.

`isDeleted` (1)

:   Indicates whether the value has been deleted.

`deleteDate` (0-1)

:   If the value has been deleted, indicates when it was deleted.

`deleteComment` (0-1)

:   If the value has been deleted, indicates why it was deleted.

Each Knora value can grant permissions (see
@ref:[Authorisation](#authorisation)).

#### Subclasses of Value

##### TextValue

Represents text, possibly including markup. The text is the object of
the `valueHasString` property. A line break is represented as a Unicode
line feed character (`U+000A`). The non-printing Unicode character
`INFORMATION SEPARATOR TWO (U+001E)` can be used to separate words that
are separated only by standoff markup (see below), so they are
recognised as separate in a full-text search index.

Markup is stored using this property:

`valueHasStandoff` (0-n)

:   Points to a standoff markup tag. See
    @ref:[Text with Standoff Markup](#text-with-standoff-markup).

`valueHasMapping` (0-1)

:   Points to the mapping used to create the standoff markup and to
    convert it back to the original XML. See
    @ref:[Mapping to Create Standoff From XML](#mapping-to-create-standoff-from-xml).

A text value can have a specified language:

`valueHasLanguage` (0-1)
: is an ISO 639-1 code as string specifying the language of the text.

##### DateValue

Humanities data includes many different types of dates. In Knora, a date
has a specified calendar, and is always represented as a period with
start and end points (which may be equal), each of which has a precision
(`DAY`, `MONTH`, or `YEAR`). An optional ERA indicator term (`BCE`,
`CE`, or `BC`, `AD`) can be added to the date, when no era is provided
the default era `AD` will be considered. Internally, the start and end
points are stored as two Julian Day Numbers. This calendar-independent
representation makes it possible to compare and search for dates
regardless of the calendar in which they were entered. Properties:

`valueHasCalendar` (1)

:   The name of the calendar in which the date should be displayed.
    Currently `GREGORIAN` and `JULIAN` are supported.

`valueHasStartJDN` (1)

:   The Julian Day Number of the start of the period (an `xsd:integer`).

`valueHasStartPrecision` (1)

:   The precision of the start of the period.

`valueHasEndJDN` (1)

:   The Julian Day Number of the end of the period (an `xsd:integer`).

`valueHasEndPrecision` (1)

:   The precision of the end of the period.

##### IntValue

Represents an integer. Property:

`valueHasInteger` (1)

:   An `xsd:integer`.

##### ColorValue

`valueHasColor` (1)

:   A string representing a color. The string encodes a color as
    hexadecimal RGB values, e.g. \"\#FF0000\".

##### DecimalValue

Represents an arbitrary-precision decimal number. Property:

`valueHasDecimal` (1)

:   An `xsd:decimal`.

##### UriValue

Represents a non-Knora URI. Property:

`valueHasUri` (1)

:   An `xsd:anyURI`.

##### BooleanValue

Represents a boolean value. Property:

`valueHasBoolean` (1)

:   An `xsd:boolean`.

##### GeomValue

Represents a geometrical object as a JSON string, using normalized
coordinates. Property:

`valueHasGeometry` (1)

:   A JSON string.

##### GeonameValue

Represents a geolocation, using the identifiers found at
[GeoNames](http://geonames.org). Property:

`valueHasGeonameCode` (1)

:   the identifier of a geographical feature from
    [GeoNames](http://geonames.org), represented as an `xsd:string`.

##### IntervalValue

Represents a time interval, with precise start and end times on a
timeline, e.g. relative to the beginning of an audio or video file.
Properties:

`valueHasIntervalStart` (1)

:   An `xsd:decimal` representing the start of the interval in seconds.

`valueHasIntervalEnd` (1)

:   An `xsd:decimal` representing the end of the interval in seconds.

##### ListValue

Projects often need to define lists or hierarchies of categories that
can be assigned to many different resources. Then, for example, a user
interface can provide a drop-down menu to allow the user to assign a
category to a resource. The `ListValue` class provides a way to
represent these sorts of data structures. It can represent either a flat
list or a tree.

A `ListValue` has this property:

`valueHasListNode` (1)

:   Points to a `ListNode`.

Each `ListNode` can have the following properties:

`isRootNode` (0-1)

:   Set to `true` if this is the root node.

`hasSubListNode` (0-n)

:   Points to the node's child nodes, if any.

`hasRootNode` (0-1)

:   Points to the root node of the list (absent if `isRootNode` is
    `true`).

`listNodePosition` (0-1)

:   An integer indicating the node's position in the list of its
    siblings (absent if `isRootNode` is `true`).

`listNodeName` (0-1)

:   The node's human-readable name (absent if `isRootNode` is `true`).

##### FileValue

Knora stores certain kinds of data outside the triplestore, in files
(see @ref:[Representations](#representations)). Each digital object that
is stored outside the triplestore has associated metadata, which is
stored in the triplestore in a `kb:FileValue`. The base class
`FileValue`, which is not intended to be used directly, has these
properties:

`internalFilename` (1)

:   The name of the file as stored by Knora.

`internalMimeType` (1)

:   The MIME type of the file as stored by Knora.

`originalFilename` (0-1)

:   The original name of the file when it was uploaded to the Knora API
    server.

`originalMimeType` (0-1)

:   The original MIME type of the file when it was uploaded to the Knora
    API server.

`isPreview` (0-1)

:   A boolean indicating whether the file is a preview, i.e.Â a small
    image representing the contents of the file. A preview is always a
    `StillImageFileValue`, regardless of the type of the enclosing
    `Representation`.

The subclasses of `FileValue`, which are intended to be used directly in
data, include:

`StillImageFileValue`

:   Contains metadata about a still image file.

`MovingImageFileValue`

:   Contains metadata about a video file.

`AudioFileValue`

:   Contains metadata about an audio file.

`DDDFileValue`

:   Contains metadata about a 3D image file.

`TextFileValue`

:   Contains metadata about a text file.

`DocumentFileValue`

:   Contains metadata about a document (such as PDF) that is not a text
    file.

Each of these classes contains properties that are specific to the type
of file it describes. For example, still image files have dimensions,
video files have frame rates, and so on.

The files in a given representation must be semantically equivalent,
meaning that coordinates that relate to one file must also be valid for
other files in the same representation. Coordinates in Knora are
expressed as fractions of the size of the object on some dimension; for
example, image coordinates are expressed as fractions of its width and
height, rather than in pixels. Therefore, the image files in a
`StillImageRepresentation` must have the same aspect ratio, but they
need not have the same dimensions in pixels. Similarly, the audio and
video files in an `AudioRepresentation` or `MovingImageRepresentation`
must have the same length in seconds, but may have different bitrates.

`FileValue` objects are versioned like other values, and the actual
files stored by Knora are also versioned. Version 1 of the Knora API
does not provide a way to retrieve a previous version of a file, but
this feature will be added in a subsequent version of the API.

##### LinkValue

A `LinkValue` is an RDF "reification" containing metadata about a link
between two resources. It is therefore a subclass of `rdf:Statement` as
well as of `Value`. It has these properties:

`rdf:subject` (1)

:   The resource that is the source of the link.

`rdf:predicate` (1)

:   The link property.

`rdf:object` (1)

:   The resource that is the target of the link.

`valueHasRefCount` (1)

:   The reference count of the link. This is meaningful when the
    `LinkValue` describes resource references in Standoff text markup
    (see @ref:[StandoffLinkTag](#standofflinktag)). Otherwise, the
    reference count will always be 1 (if the link exists) or 0 (if it
    has been deleted).

For details about how links are created in Knora, see
@ref:[Links Between Resources](#links-between-resources).

##### ExternalResValue

Represents a resource that is not stored in the RDF triplestore managed
by Knora, but instead resides in an external repository
managed by some other software. The `ExternalResValue` contains the
information that Knora needs in order to access the
resource, assuming that a suitable gateway plugin is installed.

`extResAccessInfo` (1)

:   The location of the repository containing the external resource
    (e.g. its URL).

`extResId` (1)

:   The repository-specific ID of the external resource.

`extResProvider` (1)

:   The name of the external provider of the resource.

### Links Between Resources

A link between two resources is expressed, first of all, as a triple, in
which the subject is the resource that is the source of the link, the
predicate is a "link property" (a subproperty of `kb:hasLinkTo`), and
the object is the resource that is the target of the link.

It is also useful to store metadata about links. For example, Knora
needs to know who owns the link, who has permission to modify it, when
it was created, and so on. Such metadata cannot simply describe the link
property, because then it would refer to that property in general, not
to any particular instance in which that property is used to connect two
particular resources. To attach metadata to a specific link in RDF, it
is necessary to create an RDF "reification". A reification makes
statements about a particular triple (subject, predicate, object), in
this case the triple that expresses the link between the resources.
Knora uses reifications of type `kb:LinkValue` (described in
@ref:[LinkValue](#linkvalue) to store metadata about links.

For example, suppose a project describes paintings that belong to
collections. The project can define an ontology as follows (expressed
here in [Turtle](http://www.w3.org/TR/turtle/) format, and simplified for
the purposes of illustration):

```
@prefix kb <http://www.knora.org/ontology/knora-base#> .
@prefix : <http://www.knora.org/ontology/paintings#> .

:Painting rdf:type owl:Class ;
    rdfs:subClassOf kb:Resource ,
        [ rdf:type owl:Restriction ;
            owl:onProperty :hasArtist ;
            owl:cardinality 1 ] ,
        [ rdf:type owl:Restriction ;
              owl:onProperty :hasTitle ;
              owl:cardinality 1 ] ;
        [ rdf:type owl:Restriction ;
              owl:onProperty :isInCollection ;
              owl:minCardinality 1 ] ;
        [ rdf:type owl:Restriction ;
              owl:onProperty :isInCollectionValue ;
              owl:minCardinality 1 ] .

:Collection rdf:type owl:Class ;
    rdfs:subClassOf kb:Resource ,
        [ rdf:type owl:Restriction ;
            owl:onProperty :hasCollectionName ;
            owl:cardinality 1 ] .

:hasArtist rdf:type owl:ObjectProperty ;
    rdfs:label "Name of artist" ;
    kb:subjectClassConstraint :Painting ;
    kb:objectClassConstraint kb:TextValue .

:hasTitle rdf:type owl:ObjectProperty ;
    rdfs:label "Title of painting"
    kb:subjectClassConstraint :Painting ;
    kb:objectClassConstraint kb:TextValue .

:hasCollectionName rdf:type owl:ObjectProperty ;
    rdfs:label "Name of collection" ;
    kb:subjectClassConstraint :Collection ;
    kb:objectClassConstraint kb:TextValue .
```

To link the paintings to the collection, we must add a "link property"
to the ontology. In this case, the link property will point from a
painting to the collection it belongs to. Every link property must be a
subproperty of `kb:hasLinkTo`.

```
:isInCollection rdf:type owl:ObjectProperty ;
    rdfs:subPropertyOf kb:hasLinkTo ;
    kb:subjectClassConstraint :Painting ;
    kb:objectClassConstraint :Collection .
```

We must then add a "link value property", which will point from a
painting to a `kb:LinkValue` (described in
@ref:[LinkValue](#linkvalue)), which will contain metadata about
the link between the property and the collection. In particular, the
link value specifies the creator of the link, the date when it was
created, and the permissions that determine who can view or modify it.
The name of the link value property is constructed using a simple naming
convention: the word `Value` is appended to the name of the link
property. In this case, since our link property is called
`:isInCollection`, the link value property must be called
`:isInCollectionValue`. Every link value property must be a subproperty
of `kb:hasLinkToValue`.

```
:isInCollectionValue rdf:type owl:ObjectProperty ;
    rdfs:subPropertyOf kb:hasLinkToValue ;
    kb:subjectClassConstraint :Painting ;
    kb:objectClassConstraint kb:LinkValue .
```

Given this ontology, we can create some RDF data describing a painting
and a collection:

```
@prefix paintings <http://www.knora.org/ontology/paintings#> .
@prefix data <http://www.knora.org/ontology/paintings/data#> .

data:dali_4587 rdf:type paintings:Painting ;
    paintings:hasTitle data:value_A ;
    paintings:hasArtist data:value_B .

data:value_A rdf:type kb:TextValue ;
    kb:valueHasString "The Persistence of Memory" .

data:value_B rdf:type kb:TextValue ;
    kb:valueHasString "Salvador Dali" .

data:pompidou rdf:type paintings:Collection ;
    paintings:hasCollectionName data:value_C .

data:value_C rdf:type kb:TextValue ;
    kb:valueHasString "Centre Pompidou, Paris" .
```

We can then state that the painting is in the collection:

```
data:dali_4587 paintings:isInCollection data:pompidou ;
    paintings:isinCollectionValue data:value_D .

data:value_D rdf:type kb:LinkValue ;
    rdf:subject data:dali_4587 ;
    rdf:predicate paintings:isInCollection ;
    rdf:object data:pompidou ;
    kb:valueHasRefCount 1 .
```

This creates a link (`paintings:isInCollection`) between the painting
and the collection, along with a reification containing metadata about
the link. We can visualise the result as the following graph:

![Figure 2](knora-base-fig2.dot.png "Figure 2")

Knora allows a user to see a link if the requesting user
has permission to see the source and target resources as well as the
`kb:LinkValue`.

### Text with Standoff Markup

Knora is designed to be able to store text with markup, which can
indicate formatting and structure, as well as the complex observations
involved in transcribing handwritten manuscripts. One popular way of
representing text in the humanities is to encode it in XML using the
Text Encoding Initiative
([TEI](http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/index.html))
guidelines. In Knora, a TEI/XML document can be stored as a file
with attached metadata, but this is not recommended, because it does not
allow Knora to perform searches across multiple documents.

The recommended way to store text with markup in Knora is to use
Knora's built-in support for "standoff" markup, which is stored
separately from the text. This has some advantages over embedded markup
such as XML. While XML requires markup to have a hierarchical
structure, and does not allow overlapping tags, standoff nodes do not
have these limitations (see [Using Standoff Properties for Marking-up Historical Documents in the Humanities](http://ecdosis.net/papers/schmidt.d.2016.pdf)). A standoff tag can be attached to any substring in the text by giving its start and end positions. Unlike in corpus linguistics, we
do not use any tokenisation resulting in a form of predefined segmentation, which would limit the user's ability to freely annotate any ranges in the text.

For example, suppose we have the following text:

<blockquote>This <i>sentence <strong>has overlapping</strong></i> <strong>visual</strong> attributes.</blockquote>
This would require just two standoff tags: `(italic, start=5, end=29)`
and `(bold, start=14, end=36)`.

Moreover, standoff makes it possible to mark up the same text in
different, possibly incompatible ways, allowing for different
interpretations without making redundant copies of the text. In the
Knora base ontology, any text value can have standoff tags.

By representing standoff as RDF triples, Knora makes markup searchable
across multiple text documents in a repository. For example, if a
repository contains documents in which references to persons are
indicated in standoff, it is straightforward to find all the documents
mentioning a particular person. Knora's standoff support is intended to
make it possible to convert documents with embedded, hierarchical
markup, such as TEI/XML, into RDF standoff and back again, with no data
loss, thus bringing the benefits of RDF to existing TEI-encoded
documents.

In the Knora base ontology, a `TextValue` can have one or more standoff
tags. Each standoff tag indicates the start and end positions of a
substring in the text that has a particular attribute. The OWL class
`kb:StandoffTag`, which is the base class of all standoff node classes,
has these properties:

`standoffTagHasStart` (1)

:   The index of the first character in the text that has the attribute.

`standoffTagHasEnd` (1)

:   The index of the last character in the text that has the attribute,
    plus 1.

`standoffTagHasUUID` (1)

:   A UUID identifying this instance and those corresponding to it in
    later versions of the `TextValue` it belongs to. The UUID is a means
    to maintain a reference to a particular range of a text also when
    new versions are made and standoff tag IRIs change.

`standoffTagHasOriginalXMLID` (0-1)

:   The original id of the XML element that the standoff tag represents,
    if any.

`standoffTagHasStartIndex` (1)

:   The start index of the standoff tag. Start indexes are numbered from
    0 within the context of a particular text. When several standoff
    tags share the same start position, they can be nested correctly
    with this information when transforming them to XML.

`standoffTagHasEndIndex` (1)

:   The end index of the standoff tag. Start indexes are numbered from 0
    within the context of a particular text. When several standoff tags
    share the same end position, they can be nested correctly with this
    information when transforming them to XML.

`standoffTagHasStartParent` (0-1)

:   Points to the parent standoff tag. This corresponds to the original
    nesting of tags in XML. If a standoff tag has no parent, it
    represents the XML root element. If the original XML element is a
    CLIX tag, it represents the start of a virtual (non syntactical)
    hierarchy.

`standoffTagHasEndParent` (0-1)

:   Points to the parent standoff tag if the original XML element is a
    CLIX tag and represents the end of a virtual (non syntactical)
    hierarchy.

The `StandoffTag` class is not used directly in RDF data; instead, its
subclasses are used. A few subclasses are currently provided in
`standoff-onto.ttl`, and more will be added to support TEI semantics.
Projects are able to define their own custom standoff tag classes
(direct subclasses of `StandoffTag` or one of the standoff data type
classes or subclasses of one of the standoff classes defined in
`standoff-onto.ttl`).

#### Subclasses of StandoffTag

##### Standoff Data Type Tags

Associates data in some Knora value type with a substring in a text.
Standoff data type tags are subclasses of `ValueBase` classes.

* `StandoffLinkTag` Indicates that a substring refers to another `kb:Resource`.
  See @ref:[StandoffLinkTag](#standofflinktag).
* `StandoffInternalReferenceTag` Indicates that a substring refers to another
  standoff tag in the same text value. See @ref:[Internal Links in a TextValue](#internal-links-in-a-textvalue).
* `StandoffUriTag` Indicates that a substring is associated with a URI, which
  is stored in the same form that is used for `kb:UriValue`. See @ref:[UriValue](#urivalue).
* `StandoffDateTag` Indicates that a substring represents a date, which is stored
  in the same form that is used for `kb:DateValue`. See @ref:[DateValue](#datevalue).
* `StandoffColorTag` Indicates that a substring represents a color, which is stored
  in the same form that is used for `kb:ColorValue`. See @ref:[ColorValue](#colorvalue).
* `StandoffIntegerTag` Indicates that a substring represents an integer, which is
  stored in the same form that is used for `kb:IntegerValue`. See @ref:[IntValue](#intvalue).
* `StandoffDecimalTag` Indicates that a substring represents a number with fractions,
  which is stored in the same form that is used for `kb:DecimalValue`. See @ref:[DecimalValue](#decimalvalue).
* `StandoffIntervalTag` Indicates that a substring represents an interval, which
  is stored in the same form that is used for `kb:IntervalValue`. See @ref:[IntervalValue](#intervalvalue).
* `StandoffBooleanTag` Indicates that a substring represents a Boolean, which is stored
  in the same form that is used for `kb:BooleanValue`. See @ref:[BooleanValue](#booleanvalue).

##### StandoffLinkTag

A `StandoffLinkTag` Indicates that a substring is associated with a
Knora resource. For example, if a repository contains resources
representing persons, a text could be marked up so that each time a
person's name is mentioned, a `StandoffLinkTag` connects the name to the
Knora resource describing that person. Property:

`standoffTagHasLink` (1)

:   The IRI of the resource that is referred to.

One of the design goals of the Knora ontology is to make it easy and
efficient to find out which resources contain references to a given
resource. Direct links are easier and more efficient to query than
indirect links. Therefore, when a text value contains a resource
reference in its standoff nodes, Knora automatically
creates a direct link between the containing resource and the target
resource, along with an RDF reification (a `kb:LinkValue`) describing
the link, as discussed in @ref:[Links Between Resources](#links-between-resources). In this case,
the link property is always `kb:hasStandoffLinkTo`, and the link value
property (which points to the `LinkValue`) is always
`kb:hasStandoffLinkToValue`.

Knora automatically updates direct links and reifications
for standoff resource references when text values are updated. To do
this, it keeps track of the number of text values in each resource that
contain at least one standoff reference to a given target resource. It
stores this number as the reference count of the `LinkValue` (see
@ref:[LinkValue](#linkvalue)) describing the direct link. Each
time this number changes, it makes a new version of the `LinkValue`,
with an updated reference count. When the reference count reaches zero,
it removes the direct link and makes a new version of the `LinkValue`,
marked with `kb:isDeleted`.

For example, if `data:R1` is a resource with a text value in which the
resource `data:R2` is referenced, the repository could contain the
following triples:

```
data:R1 ex:hasComment data:V1 .

data:V1 rdf:type kb:TextValue ;
    kb:valueHasString "This link is internal." ;
    kb:valueHasStandoff data:SO1 .

data:SO1 rdf:type kb:StandoffLinkTag ;
    kb:standoffTagHasStart: 5 ;
    kb:standoffTagHasEnd: 9 ;
    kb:standoffTagHasLink data:R2 .

data:R1 kb:hasStandoffLinkTo data:R2 .
data:R1 kb:hasStandoffLinkToValue data:LV1 .

data:LV1 rdf:type kb:LinkValue ;
    rdf:subject data:R1 ;
    rdf:predicate kb:hasStandoffLinkTo ;
    rdf:object data:R2 ;
    kb:valueHasRefCount 1 .
```

The result can be visualized like this:

![Figure 3](knora-base-fig3.dot.png "Figure 3")

Link values created automatically for resource references in standoff
are visible to all users, and the creator of these link values is always
`kb:SystemUser` (see @ref:[Users and Groups](#users-and-groups)). The
Knora API server allows a user to see a standoff link if the user has
permission to see the source and target resources.

#### Internal Links in a TextValue

Internal links in a `TextValue` can be represented using the data type
standoff class `StandoffInternalReferenceTag` or a subclass of it. It
has the following property:

`standoffTagHasInternalReference` (1)

:   Points to a `StandoffTag` that belongs to the same `TextValue`. It
    has an `objectClassConstraint` of `StandoffTag`.

For links to a `kb:Resource`, see @ref:[StandoffLinkTag](#standofflinktag).

#### Mapping to Create Standoff From XML

A mapping allows for the conversion of an XML document to RDF-standoff
and back. A mapping defines one-to-one relations between XML elements
(with or without a class) and attributes and standoff classes and
properties (see @ref:[XML to Standoff Mapping](../03-apis/api-v1/xml-to-standoff-mapping.md)).

A mapping is represented by a `kb:XMLToStandoffMapping` which contains
one or more `kb:MappingElement`. A `kb:MappingElement` maps an XML
element (including attributes) to a standoff class and standoff
properties. It has the following properties:

`mappingHasXMLTagname` (1)

:   The name of the XML element that is mapped to a standoff class.

`mappingHasXMLNamespace` (1)

:   The XML namespace of the XML element that is mapped to a standoff
    class. If no namespace is given, `noNamespace` is used.

`mappingHasXMLClass` (1)

:   The name of the class of the XML element. If it has no class,
    `noClass` is used.

`mappingHasStandoffClass` (1)

:   The standoff class the XML element is mapped to.

`mappingHasXMLAttribute` (0-n)

:   Maps XML attributes to standoff properties using
    `MappingXMLAttribute`. See below.

`mappingHasStandoffDataTypeClass` (0-1)

:   Indicates the standoff data type class of the standoff class the XML
    element is mapped to.

`mappingElementRequiresSeparator` (1)

:   Indicates if there should be an invisible word separator inserted
    after the XML element in the RDF-standoff representation. Once the
    markup is stripped, text segments that belonged to different
    elements may be concatenated.

A `MappingXMLAttribute` has the following properties:

`mappingHasXMLAttributename`

:   The name of the XML attribute that is mapped to a standoff property.

`mappingHasXMLNamespace`

:   The namespace of the XML attribute that is mapped to a standoff
    property. If no namespace is given, `noNamespace` is used.

`mappingHasStandoffProperty`

:   The standoff property the XML attribute is mapped to.

Knora includes a standard mapping used by the SALSAH GUI. It has the IRI
`http://rdfh.ch/standoff/mappings/StandardMapping` and defines mappings
for a few elements used to write texts with simple markup.

#### Standoff in Digital Editions

Knora's standoff is designed to make it possible to convert XML
documents to standoff and back. One application for this feature is an
editing workflow in which an editor works in an XML editor, and the
resulting XML documents are converted to standoff and stored in Knora,
where they can be searched and annotated.

If an editor wants to correct text that has been imported from XML into
standoff, the text can be exported as XML, edited, and imported again.
To preserve annotations on standoff tags across edits, each tag can
automatically be given a UUID. In a future version of the Knora base
ontology, it will be possible to create annotations that point to UUIDs
rather than to IRIs. When a text is exported to XML, the UUIDs can be
included in the XML. When the edited XML is imported again, it can be
converted to new standoff tags with the same UUIDs. Annotations that
applied to standoff tags in the previous version of the text will
therefore also apply to equivalent tags in the new version.

When text is converted from XML into standoff, tags are also given
indexes, which are numbered from 0 within the context of a particular
text. This makes it possible to order tags that share the same position,
and to preserve the hierarchy of the original XML document. An ordinary,
hierarchical XML tag is converted to a standoff tag that has one index,
as well as the index of its parent tag, if any. The Knora base ontology
also supports non-hierarchical markup such as
[CLIX](http://conferences.idealliance.org/extreme/html/2004/DeRose01/EML2004DeRose01.html#t6),
which enables overlapping markup to be represented in XML. When
non-hierarchical markup is converted to standoff, both the start
position and the end position of the standoff tag have indexes and
parent indexes.

To support these features, a standoff tag can have these additional
properties:

`standoffTagHasStartIndex` (0-1)

:   The index of the start position.

`standoffTagHasEndIndex` (0-1)

:   The index of the end position, if this is a non-hierarchical tag.

`standoffTagHasStartParent` (0-1)

:   The IRI of the tag, if any, that contains the start position.

`standoffTagHasEndParent` (0-1)

:   The IRI of the tag, if any, that contains the end position, if this
    is a non-hierarchical tag.

`standoffTagHasUUID` (0-1)

:   A UUID that can be used to annotate a standoff tag that may be
    present in different versions of a text, or in different layers of a
    text (such as a diplomatic transcription and an edited critical
    text).

#### Querying Standoff in SPARQL

A future version of Knora will provide an API for
querying standoff markup. In the meantime, it is possible to query it
directly in SPARQL. For example, here is a SPARQL query (using RDFS
inference) that finds all the text values texts that have a standoff
date tag referring to Christmas Eve 2016, contained in a
`StandoffItalicTag`:

```sparql
PREFIX knora-base: <http://www.knora.org/ontology/knora-base#>
PREFIX standoff: <http://www.knora.org/ontology/standoff#>

select * where {
    ?standoffTag a knora-base:StandoffDateTag  .

    ?standoffTag knora-base:valueHasStartJDN ?dateStart .
    ?standoffTag knora-base:valueHasEndJDN ?dateEnd .

    FILTER (2457747  <= ?dateEnd && 2457747  >= ?dateStart)

    ?standoffTag knora-base:standoffTagHasStartParent ?parent .
    ?parent a standoff:StandoffItalicTag .

    ?textValue knora-base:valueHasStandoff ?standoffTag .
    ?textValue knora-base:valueHasString ?string .

    ?standoffTag knora-base:standoffTagHasStart ?startPos .
    ?standoffTag knora-base:standoffTagHasEnd ?endPos .  
}
```

### Authorisation

### Users and Groups

Each Knora user is represented by an object belonging to the class
`kb:User`, which is a subclass of `foaf:Person`, and has the following
properties:

`userid` (1)

:   A unique identifier that the user must provide when logging in.

`password` (1)

:   A cryptographic hash of the user's password.

`email` (0-n)

:   Email addresses belonging to the user.

`isInProject` (0-n)

:   Projects that the user is a member of.

`isInGroup` (0-n)

:   Project-specific groups that the user is a member of.

`foaf:familyName` (1)

:   The user's family name.

`foaf:givenName` (1)

:   The user's given name.

Knora's concept of access control is that an object (a resource or
value) can grant permissions to groups of users (but not to individual
users). There are four built-in groups:

`UnknownUser`

:   Any user who has not logged into Knora is
    automatically assigned to this group.

`KnownUser`

:   Any user who has logged into Knora is automatically
    assigned to this group.

`ProjectMember`

:   When checking a user's permissions on an object, the user is
    automatically assigned to this group if she is a member of the
    project that the object belongs to.

`Creator`

:   When checking a user's permissions on an object, the user is
    automatically assigned to this group if he is the creator of the
    object.

A project-specific ontology can define additional groups, which must
belong to the OWL class `kb:UserGroup`.

There is one built-in `SystemUser`, which is the creator of link values
created automatically for resource references in standoff markup (see
@ref:[StandoffLinkTag](#standofflinktag)).

### Permissions

An object can grant the following permissions, which are stored in a
compact format in a single string. This string is the object of the
predicate `kb:hasPermissions`, which is required on every `kb:Resource`
and `kb:Value`.

1.  **Restricted view permission (RV)** Allows a restricted view of the
    object, e.g.Â a view of an image with a watermark.
2.  **View permission (V)** Allows an unrestricted view of the object.
    Having view permission on a resource only affects the user's ability
    to view information about the resource other than its values. To
    view a value, she must have view permission on the value itself.
3.  **Modify permission (M)** For values, this permission allows a new
    version of a value to be created. For resources, this allows the
    user to create a new value (as opposed to a new version of an
    existing value), or to change information about the resource other
    than its values. When he wants to make a new version of a value, his
    permissions on the containing resource are not relevant. However,
    when he wants to change the target of a link, the old link must be
    deleted and a new one created, so he needs modify permission on the
    resource.
4.  **Delete permission (D)** Allows the item to be marked as deleted.
5.  **Change rights permission (CR)** Allows the permissions granted by
    the object to be changed.

Each permission in the above list implies all lower-numbered
permissions. A user's permission level on a particular object is
calculated in the following way:

1.  Make a list of the groups that the user belongs to, including
    `Creator` and/or `ProjectMember` if applicable.
2.  Make a list of the permissions that she can obtain on the object, by
    iterating over the permissions that the object grants. For each
    permission, if she is in the specified group, add the specified
    permission to the list of permissions she can obtain.
3.  From the resulting list, select the highest-level permission.
4.  If the result is that she would have no permissions, give her
    whatever permission `UnknownUser` would have.

To view a link between resources, a user needs permission to view the
source and target resources. He also needs permission to view the
`LinkValue` representing the link, unless the link property is
`hasStandoffLinkTo` (see @ref:[StandoffLinkTag](#standofflinktag)).

The format of the object of `kb:hasPermissions` is as follows:

-   Each permission is represented by the one-letter or two-letter
    abbreviation given above.
-   Each permission abbreviation is followed by a space, then a
    comma-separated list of groups that the permission is granted to.
-   The IRIs of built-in groups are shortened using the `knora-base`
    prefix.
-   Multiple permissions are separated by a vertical bar (`|`).

For example, if an object grants view permission to unknown and known
users, and modify permission to project members, the resulting
permission literal would be:

```
V knora-base:UnknownUser,knora-base:KnownUser|M knora-base:ProjectMember
```

### Consistency Checking

Knora tries to enforce repository consistency by checking constraints
that are specified in the Knora base ontology and in project-specific
ontologies. Three types of consistency rules are enforced:

-   Cardinalities in OWL class definitions must be satisfied.
-   Constraints on the types of the subjects and objects of OWL object
    properties must be satisfied.
-   A datatype property may not have an empty string as an object.

The implementation of consistency checking is partly
triplestore-dependent; Knora may be able to provide stricter checks with
some triplestores than with others.

### OWL Cardinalities

As noted in @ref:[Resources](#resources), each subclass of
`Resource` must use OWL cardinality restrictions to specify the
properties it can have. More specifically, a resource is allowed to have
a property that is a subproperty of `kb:hasValue` or `kb:hasLinkTo` only
if the resource's class has some cardinality for that property.
Similarly, a value is allowed to have a subproperty of `kb:valueHas`
only if the value's class has some cardinality for that property.

Knora supports, and attempts to enforce, the following cardinality
constraints:

`owl:cardinality 1`

:   A resource of this class must have exactly one instance of the
    specified property.

`owl:minCardinality 1`

:   A resource of this class must have at least one instance of the
    specified property.

`owl:maxCardinality 1`

:   A resource of this class may have zero or one instance of the
    specified property.

`owl:minCardinality 0`

:   A resource of this class may have zero or more instances of the
    specified property.

Knora requires cardinalities to be defined using blank nodes, as in the
following example from `knora-base`:

```
:Representation rdf:type owl:Class ;
    rdfs:subClassOf :Resource ,
        [ rdf:type owl:Restriction ;
          owl:onProperty :hasFileValue ;
          owl:minCardinality "1"^^xsd:nonNegativeInteger ] .

:StillImageRepresentation rdf:type owl:Class ;
    rdfs:subClassOf :Representation ,
        [ rdf:type owl:Restriction ;
          owl:onProperty :hasStillImageFileValue ;
          owl:minCardinality "1"^^xsd:nonNegativeInteger ] .
```

Each `owl:Restriction` may have the predicate `salsah-gui:guiOrder` to
indicate the order in which properties should be displayed in a GUI
(see @ref:[The SALSAH GUI Ontology](salsah-gui.md)).

A resource class inherits cardinalities from its superclasses. This
follows from the rules of
[RDFS](http://www.w3.org/TR/2014/REC-rdf-schema-20140225/) inference.
Also, in Knora, cardinalities in the subclass can override cardinalities
that would otherwise be inherited from the superclass. Specifically, if
a superclass has a cardinality on a property P, and a subclass has a
cardinality on a subproperty of P, the subclass's cardinality overrides
the superclass's cardinality. In the example above,
`hasStillImageFileValue` is a subproperty of `hasFileValue`. Therefore,
the cardinality on `hasStillImageFileValue` overrides (i.e. replaces)
the one on `hasFileValue`.

Note that, unlike cardinalities, predicates of properties are not
inherited. If `:foo rdfs:subPropertyOf :bar`, this does not mean that
`:foo` inherits anything from `:bar`. Any predicates of `:foo` that are
also needed by `:bar` must be defined explicitly on `:bar`. This design
decision was made because property predicate inheritance is not provided
by RDFS inference, and would make it more difficult to check the
correctness of ontologies, while providing little practical benefit.

For more information about OWL cardinalities, seeÂ the [OWL 2
Primer](http://www.w3.org/TR/2012/REC-owl2-primer-20121211/).

### Constraints on the Types of Property Subjects and Objects

When a project-specific ontology defines a property, it must indicate
the types that are allowed as objects (and, if possible, as subjects) of
the property. This is done using the following Knora-specific
properties:

`subjectClassConstraint`

:   Specifies the class that subjects of the property must belong to.
    This constraint is recommended but not required. Knora will attempt
    to enforce this constraint.

`objectClassConstraint`

:   If the property is an object property, specifies the class that
    objects of the property must belong to. Every subproperty of
    `kb:hasValue` or a `kb:hasLinkTo` (i.e. every property of a resource
    that points to a `kb:Value` or to another resource) is required to
    have this constraint, because Knora relies on it to
    know what type of object to expect for the property. Knora will
    attempt to enforce this constraint.

`objectDatatypeConstraint`

:   If the property is a datatype property, specifies the type of
    literals that can be objects of the property. Knora will not attempt
    to enforce this constraint, but it is useful for documentation
    purposes.

Note that it is possible for a subproperty to have a more restrictive
contraint than its base property, by specifing a subject or object class
that is a subclass of the one specified in the base property. However,
it is not possible for the subproperty to make the base property's
constraint less restrictive.

See also @ref:[Why doesnât Knora use rdfs:domain and rdfs:range for consistency checking?](../faq.md#why-doesnt-knora-use-rdfs-domain-and-rdfs-range-for-consistency-checking-)

### Consistency Constraint Example

A project-specific ontology could define consistency constraints as in
this simplified example:

```
:book rdf:type owl:Class ;
    rdfs:subClassOf knora-base:Resource ,
        [ rdf:type owl:Restriction ;
          owl:onProperty :hasTitle ;
          owl:cardinality "1"^^xsd:nonNegativeInteger ] ,
        [ rdf:type owl:Restriction ;
          owl:onProperty :hasAuthor ;
          owl:minCardinality "0"^^xsd:nonNegativeInteger ] .

:hasTitle rdf:type owl:ObjectProperty ;
    knora-base:subjectClassConstraint :book ;
    knora-base:objectClassConstraint knora-base:TextValue .

:hasAuthor rdf:type owl:ObjectProperty ;
    knora-base:subjectClassConstraint :book ;
    knora-base:objectClassConstraint knora-base:TextValue .
```

## Summary of Restrictions on Project-Specific Ontologies

### Restrictions on Classes

-   Each class must be a subclass of either `kb:Resource` or
    `kb:StandoffTag`, but not both (note that this forbids
    project-specific subclasses of `kb:Value`).
-   All the cardinalities that a class defines directly (i.e. does not
    inherit from `kb:Resource`) must be on properties that are defined
    in the triplestore.
-   Within the cardinalities of a class, there must be a link value
    property for each link property and vice versa.
-   Each class must be a subclass of all the classes that are subject
    class constraints of the properties in its cardinalities.
-   If it's a resource class, all its directly defined cardinalities
    must be on Knora resource properties (subproperties of `kb:hasValue`
    or `kb:hasLinkTo`), and all its base classes with Knora IRIs must
    also be resource classes. A cardinality on `kb:resourceProperty` or
    `kb:hasValue` is forbidden. It must also have an `rdfs:label`.
-   If it's a standoff class, none of its cardinalities may be on Knora
    resource properties, and all its base classes with Knora IRIs must
    also be standoff classes.

### Restrictions on properties

-   The property's subject class constraint, if provided, must be a
    subclass of `kb:Resource` or `kb:StandoffTag`, and must be a
    subclass of the subject class constraints of all its base
    properties.
-   Its object class constraint, if provided, must be a subclass of the
    object class constraints of all its base properties.
-   If the property is a Knora resource property, it must have an object
    class constraint and an `rdfs:label`.
-   It can't be a subproperty of both `kb:hasValue` and `kb:hasLinkTo`.
-   It can't be a subproperty of `kb:hasFileValue`.
-   Each of its base properties that has a Knora IRI must also be a
    Knora resource property.

## Standardisation

The [DaSCH](http://dasch.swiss/) intends to coordinate the
standardisation of generally useful entities proposed in
project-specific ontologies. We envisage a process in which two or more
projects would initiate the process by starting a public discussion on
proposed entities to be shared. Once a consensus was reached, the
[DaSCH](http://dasch.swiss/) would publish these entities in an ontology
that could be used by multiple projects, and would ensure that such
ontologies are not subsequently modified in ways that break
compatibility with existing data. Functionality may be added to
Knora to facilitate this process.
